It’s the most magical time of the year: that week between Christmas and New Years. The roads are empty, the fridge is full of leftovers, and oh my god there are only three of us in this office.

While academics (deservedly!) check out for the holiday season and leave the science news cycle about as lively as a funeral parlor, we know your thirst for intriguing stories is never-ceasing. So from those of us tending PopSci from a very cold (why is it so cold?) office in Manhattan and our respective parents’ couches across the country, here are stories from 2017 that made us say “say, what now?”

We hope you enjoy them.

Tentacled nightmare monsters from hell
Rachel Feltman

As I attempted to enjoy some homemade tomato soup on a lovely October evening, Popular Science Editor-in-Chief Joe Brown derailed my chill by sending me a video on Facebook. It still haunts me.

But it also reminded me that nature comes up with way freakier stuff than we tend to give it credit for, which inspired this list of the world's weirdest looking animals. Relatedly, I recently ranked the world's most mysterious hums, and I think it might be my finest work to date.

DEER ARE EVILI've always known that deer had it out for us. This story by Sarah Fecht finally helped show the world what I've long believed: Deer are the worst. (Spoiler alert: They were caught eating human remains for the first time.)

Monkeys having sex with deer
Rachel Feltman

In other deer-related news, this story about monkeys initiating mutually-beneficial sexual encounters with deer (yes, deer) really blew my mind. It was a fun one to report, and definitely isn't as gross as most people figured from the headline. You'll come away kind of inspired by these monkeys, I promise. My mom said this article was a sort of subversive piece of social commentary? She might be right?

What's gotten into your head?
Claire Maldarelli

This recap of random objects found inside people's skulls definitely ranks as my weirdest/grossest story of 2017. Warning: This post may cause you to believe something is residing in your skull. Don’t worry, it's all in your head.