One persistent tenet of poor science communication is the use of the word "baffled." Especially in the UK, where scientists are often called "boffins." Boffins baffled by new discovery just sounds too good not to put in a headline, amiright? But it really grinds scientists' gears to see such a statement, because the field is rarely actually baffled. Science isn't some set body of facts that can never be contradicted without total puzzlement; it's a method of inquiry by which we steadily accrue small increases in understanding. Findings are often controversial if they suggest a major paradigm shift might be around the bend; they're often at least mildly surprising, because there's a lot of stuff we don't know yet. But hold onto your butts, because this one is actually baffling—in the best possible sense.

In a study published recently in Nature, astronomers describe the strange and unprecedented case of a star that just wouldn't die.

It looks like a supernova—the explosive death of a star—and quacks like a supernova. But, uh, it just kept quacking and quacking and quacking. And scientists aren't sure why.

"When I saw the proofs of the paper it kind of blew my mind,” study author Nick Konidaris of the Carnegie Institution for Science told Gizmodo. Every parent thinks their child is astounding, so it's not unusual to hear researchers talk this way about studies they've authored. But other experts agree.


"I'm not sure, and I don't think anyone else is sure, just what the hell is happening," astrophysicist Stanford Woosley, at University of California, Santa Cruz—who wasn't involved in the study—told Space.com. "And yet it happened, and so it begs explanation."

What's a supernova supposed to look like?
"Every supernova so far observed has been considered to be the terminal explosion of a star," the authors note in the opening line of their study. The explosion part is still definitely true, but these new findings bring the "terminal" bit under new scrutiny. But before we explain what's so whack-a-doodle about this particular cosmic explosion, here's a refresher on more run-of-the-mill supernovae