Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, in Physics, and with her later win, in Chemistry, she became the first person to claim Nobel honors twice.
Who Was Marie Curie?
Born Maria Sklodowska on November 7, 1867, Marie Curie became the first woman to win a Nobel Prize and the first person—man or woman—to win the award twice. Curie's efforts, with her husband Pierre Curie, led to the discovery of polonium and radium and, after Pierre's death, the further development of X-rays. The famed scientist died on July 4, 1934. 

Tech Giants: Knowing from atoms. This 1925 file photo shows professor Marie Curie working in her laboratory at the University of Paris. Marie Curie and her husband, Pierre, discovered the chemical element Polonium and received the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1903. (AFP/Getty Images.)
Marie Curie working in her laboratory at the University of Paris in 1925. (AFP/Getty Images.)

What Did Marie Curie Discover?
Marie Curie discovered radioactivity, and, together with her husband Pierre, the radioactive elements polonium and radium, while working with the mineral pitchblende.

Fascinated with the work of Henri Becquerel, a French physicist who discovered that uranium casts off rays weaker than the X-rays found by Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen, Marie Curie took his work a few steps further. Curie conducted her own experiments on uranium rays and discovered that they remained constant, no matter the condition or form of the uranium. The rays, she theorized, came from the element's atomic structure. This revolutionary idea created the field of atomic physics. Curie herself coined the word "radioactivity" to describe the phenomena.

Following Marie’s discovery of radioactivity, she continued her research with her husband. Working with the mineral pitchblende, the pair discovered a new radioactive element in 1898. They named the element polonium, after Marie's native country of Poland. They also detected the presence of another radioactive material in the pitchblende, and called that radium. In 1902, the Curies announced that they had produced a decigram of pure radium, demonstrating its existence as a unique chemical element.


Husband and Daughter
Marie married French physicist Pierre Curie on July 26, 1895. They were introduced by a colleague of Marie’s after she graduated from the University of Sorbonne; Marie had received a commission to perform a study on different types of steel and their magnetic properties and needed a lab to work in. A romance developed between the brilliant pair, and they became a scientific dynamic duo who were completely devoted to one another. At first Marie and Pierre worked on separate projects. But after Marie discovered radioactivity, Pierre put aside his own work to help her with her research.

Marie suffered a tremendous loss in 1906, when Pierre was killed in Paris after accidentally stepping in front of a horse-drawn wagon. Despite her tremendous grief, she took over his teaching post at the Sorbonne, becoming the institution's first female professor.

In 1911, Marie Curie’s relationship with her husband's former student, Paul Langevin, became public. Curie was derided in the press for breaking up Langevin's marriage, the negativity in part stemming from rising xenophobia in France.

Daughters
In 1897 Marie and Pierre Curie welcomed a daughter, Irene. The couple had a second daughter, Eve, in 1904. Irene Joliot-Curie followed in her mother's footsteps, winning the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1935. Joliot-Curie shared the honor with her husband, Frederic Joliot, for their work on the synthesis of new radioactive elements.